Update enhancement proposal to support update of user-defined AWS tags (#1000)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/api-review/custom-tags-aws.md

title: apply-user-defined-tags-to-all-aws-resources-created-by-openshift
authors:
  - "@gregsheremeta"
  - "@tgeer"
reviewers:

>   - @decarr

Reviewer: add the team leads in the reviewers

  - @bparees
approvers:

>   - @decarr 

Reviewer: you can add me

title: apply-user-defined-tags-to-all-aws-resources-created-by-openshift
authors:
  - "@gregsheremeta"
  - "@tgeer"
reviewers:
  - @joelspeed
  - @Miciah
  - @sinnykumari
  - @dmage
  - @staebler
approvers:
  - @tjungblu

> 

Reviewer: nit: newline

Note: this enhancement is slightly retroactive. Work has already begun on this. See
- https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/864
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/578

> - https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1064/files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1064
```

Author: Thanks, change done.

resources created by in-cluster operators.
  `propagateUserTags` is mandatory field.
  `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field will be set for deprecation.

  If `propagateUserTags` is set to true, install validation will fail if there is any tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io`.

- Add a new field `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. Tags included in the
  `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

  `.spec.platformSpec.aws` is a mutable field and `.status.platformStatus.aws` is immutable.
  `.status.platformStatus.aws` will have older version tags defined and is required for upgrade case.

- All operators that create AWS resources (ingress, cloud credential, storage, image registry, machine-api) will apply these tags to all AWS resources they create.
  Operator must update the AWS resource within (5 minutes + cloud provide API response time).
  Operator must update only when there is a change in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.

>   Operator must consider `.status.platformStatus.aws` when AWS resource is created. `.status.platformStatus.aws` can be ignored for user-defined tag update/delete.

Author: There is no need to sync to status. As spec has the actual values. Sync to status was required in earlier design to identify if the tag was created using Infrastructure CRD or external tool. Identifying the creator tool was done to restrict user from editing the same tag user kv pair using multiple tools. This inherently poses many scenarios of conflicts which will result in user tag kv pair being inconsistent across cluster when applied using Infrastructure CRD. Hence, user will be confused which tool to be used to update tag.

>   Operator must consider `.status.platformStatus.aws` when AWS resource is created. `.status.platformStatus.aws` can be ignored for user-defined tag update/delete.

Reviewer 3: I'd counter that with the argument that because we already have some values in the status, it's now confusing to a user because half the values come from spec, half come from status, or have I misunderstood?

It was my understanding that we synced to status so that there's a single source of truth for the rest of the cluster components to read from, I don't remember the status vs spec being used to distinguish between an external tool and the infra CRD?

Are we planning to completely deprecate and remove the status field? Does the status field still serve a purpose?

>   Operator must consider `.status.platformStatus.aws` when AWS resource is created. `.status.platformStatus.aws` can be ignored for user-defined tag update/delete.

Author: The plan is to completely deprecate and remove the status field.

3) The new user-defined tag request has empty string `""`, the user-defined tag value for the AWS resource will be updated. Please refer to the `Delete Scenarios` for more details on empty value string handling.
   For example,
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_old`
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 =`
   Action = Existing tag for AWS resource is updated to reflect new value.
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource. A warning also must be generated about user-defined tag being marked for deletion.

### Delete tags scenarios
User-defined tags are deleted in two-pass method to avoid accidental deletion of tags by the user.
- In the first pass, the user sets the user-defined tag value to empty string.
- In the second pass, the user-defined tag is deleted only when following conditions are met,
  1) the user-defined tag set to AWS resource has empty string value.

>   2) the user-defined tag set in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has empty string.

Author: If a user sets the tag value to empty on the infrastructure resource, controllers will update to empty. 
In the second update or operator sync(), if the infrastructure resource still has the empty string, the resource will be deleted.

The protection here is about, if the user accidentally leaves the tag empty, user still has time to revert the change.

>   2) the user-defined tag set in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has empty string.

Reviewer 3: > The protection here is about, if the user accidentally leaves the tag empty, user still has time to revert the change.

That's probably not sufficient protection, the likelihood that a resource is synced twice within a matter of seconds is very high in certain applications and as such, this two stage approach doesn't really buy the end user anything.

What's the negative effect of just removing the tag straight away? The user can always add it back no?

>   2) the user-defined tag set in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has empty string.

Reviewer 3: Removing the tag for an empty string seems reasonable, but, is an empty value a valid option on AWS? If an empty value is allowed, then that won't work because an empty value could be a valid customer use case

   Action = Update existing tag with value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_infra1`
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource.

2) User deletes the user-defined tag from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`
   The user-defined tag which is removed from spec, will not be reconciled or managed by operators.
   User can update user-defined tag key:value using external tool. The user-defined tag will not be overwritten.

   For example,
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value1`
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has no user-defined tag with key `key_infra1`
   Action = No change in existing user-defined tag.
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value1`
   Event action = No event

3) User sets user-defined tag to delete which is created using external tools.
   There is no validation check involved for creator of user-defined tag. Any user-defined tag added by user in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` is considered for create/update/delete accordingly.

> 4) Any user-defined tag set using `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` in `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io/v1` type has scope limited to cluster-level. Individual AWS resource-level user-defined tag management is not supported.

Author: During creation, user tags are read from install config and applied to all resources created for the cluster. Update is handled by the operators which manage these resources. For example, in case of machine scale operations, tags will be applied as per the values in spec from Infrastructure CRD.

> 4) Any user-defined tag set using `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` in `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io/v1` type has scope limited to cluster-level. Individual AWS resource-level user-defined tag management is not supported.

Reviewer 3: > For example, in case of machine scale operations, tags will be applied as per the values in spec from Infrastructure CRD.

That's not the behaviour that we exhibit today and making that true would be a breaking change.

If a user creates a MachineSet at a later date, what happens about the tags? They don't have the infra tags as it wasn't created during install, they can put whatever they like on there, there's nothing to stop them putting a value which conflicts with the Infrastructure resource, and IMO, they should be able to. The Machine spec is closest to the creation of the resource and should be highest precedence unless absolutely critical not to (eg the Name or cluster ID tags).

I don't think we can change this behaviour between releases. What are controllers outside of Machine API doing? How many different CRDs in OpenShift allow tags at the moment?

                type: string
                maxLength: 256
                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
```

If `experimentalPropagateUserTags` is true, install validation will fail if there is any tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io`.
### User Stories

Add a new field `resourceTags` to `.status.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. Tags included in the
`resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field is true.
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDE-1146 - IAM users and roles can only operate on resources with specific tags
As a security-conscious ROSA customer, I want to restrict the permissions granted to Red Hat in my AWS account by using
AWS resource tags.

Note existing unchanged behavior: The installer will apply these tags to all AWS resources it creates with terraform (e.g. bootstrap and master EC2 instances) from the install config, not from infrastructure status, and regardless if the propagation option is set.
### API Extensions

> All operators that create AWS resources (ingress, cloud credential, storage, image registry, machine-api)

Reviewer 3: Losing this enumeration of known components that create tags is not great, I was just about to ask can we create a list of places where tags are currently applied

Author: Yes, the list of components where tags are applied is listed in limitations section along with components which are not updated.

Reviewer 3: Can you link me to the line, I can't see the list

will apply these tags to all AWS resources they create.
This proposal edits `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io/v1` type

> userTags that are specified in the infrastructure resource will merge with userTags specified in an individual component. In the case where a userTag is specified in the infrastructure resource and there is a tag with the same key specified in an individual component, the value from the individual component will have precedence and be used.

Author: Yes, now the design does not intend to solve "same tag creator tool must be used to update the user tag".

> userTags that are specified in the infrastructure resource will merge with userTags specified in an individual component. In the case where a userTag is specified in the infrastructure resource and there is a tag with the same key specified in an individual component, the value from the individual component will have precedence and be used.

Reviewer 3: I disagree, see my other comments, there is still an API that allows users to set tags on other objects, eg, Machines, and you aren't addressing how these should be handled

- User-defined tags cannot be updated for vpc, security groups, elb, route53, subnet resources as there is no operator managing the resources post installation.
   User-defined tags cannot be updated to an AWS resource which is not managed by an operator in openshift-* namespace.
- User-defined tags can be updated on the following AWS resources.
  1. EC2 instances for master and worker nodes.
  2. Image registry.
  3. Ingress LB.
  4. IAM credentials by CCO in mint mode of operation.

## Proposal

- Existing `experimentalPropagateUserTags` will be renamed to `propagateUserTags` in `.platform.aws` of install config to indicate that the user tags should be applied to AWS
resources created by in-cluster operators.\
  `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field will be set for deprecation.

  If `propagateUserTags` is set to true, install validation will fail if there is any tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io`.

- Add a new field `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. Tags included in the

>   `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

Author: Yes, there must be tag validation done before applying the tags. Update cannot be rejected at api level for now. The upstream alpha version of CRD validation using regular expression for spec object can be adopted when the feature is updated to beta.

>   `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

Reviewer 3: It seems sub-optimal to have all of this logic spread about through many controllers, are there future plans to centralise this tag validation?

>   `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

Author: Yes, the CRD validation using regular expression will help to optimize it. The feature is an alpha release in the upstream.

>   `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

Author: For validating fixed strings it is faster to have regular-expression based check done by API server which is already part of upstream. Validating web-hooks would qualify to be better when there are validations that cannot be worked with regular expressions, for example, different type of rules to be validated on the object, comparing any dependent states in other objects.

>   `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

Reviewer 3: IMO, it seems like having this validation is a must have, so we either need a webhook, or to wait for the alpha feature to be promoted.

I know there is some validation for string fields, is it validation for map fields that is alpha? Do you have a link to the KEP?

>   `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/2877/files

  `.spec.platformSpec.aws` is a mutable field and `.status.platformStatus.aws` is immutable.
  `.status.platformStatus.aws` will have older version tags defined and is required for upgrade case.

- All operators that create AWS resources (ingress, cloud credential, storage, image registry, machine-api) will apply these tags to all AWS resources they create.\
  Operator must update the AWS resource within (5 minutes + cloud provide API response time).\

>   Operator must update only when there is a change in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.\

Author: Yes, correct. The statement was written to convey an implementation note for the case, "if there is no update in tags, do not overwrite the tags on AWS resource". As this might end up in too many calls to AWS. Cool, rewriting it.

   For example,\
   Existing tag in local object like machine CRD = `key_infra1 = custom_value`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value1`\
   Action = The tag for AWS resource is maintained to `key_infra1 = custom_value`.\
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`\
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource. A warning also must be generated about list of user-defined tags on which action is not applicable.

2) `.spec.platformSpec.aws` take precedence over `.status.platformStatus.aws`. User-defined tags must be merged from `.status.platformStatus.aws` and set to AWS resource.
   On delete, user-defined must also be removed from `.status.platformStatus.aws`, if present.

### Caveats
1) User updates the user-defined tag from using external tools when there is an entry in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`
   The user-defined tag which is updated from spec, will be reconciled by operators to set value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.

>    The user-defined tag will be overwritten with value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` when there is an update to `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` section as a whole.

Author: 1) For tags update on Infra resource, there is no need to keep tags. Tags from local objects are compared for keys and rejected for updates.
2) In there is any machine object change for tags, the existing implementation replaces the specific updated key and will not be managed through Infrastructure CRD.

>    The user-defined tag will be overwritten with value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` when there is an update to `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` section as a whole.

Reviewer 3: I still don't really understand why `section as a whole` is referenced here, it was my understanding that if there is any drift in the tags, the tags would be updated. The controller compares what it expects the tags to be, to what the current state is, if there's no change, it's a no-op, if there's a difference, it makes a change.

The `section as a whole` part of this implies to me that we shouldn't be doing that and that we should only be reconciling the tags when the tags change on the `Infrastructure` CRD, perhaps this needs rewording?

>    The user-defined tag will be overwritten with value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` when there is an update to `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` section as a whole.

Author: Correct, rewording it. Thanks :)

description: AWS contains settings specific to the Amazon Web Services Infrastructure provider.
type: object
properties:
    resourceTags:
    description: ResourceTags is a list of additional tags to apply to AWS resources created for the cluster. See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws_tagging.html for information on tagging AWS resources.
    type: array
    maxItems: 10
    items:
        description: AWSResourceTag is a tag to apply to AWS resources created for the cluster.
        type: object
        required:
            - key
            - value
        properties:
            key:
                description: key is the key of the tag
                type: string
                maxLength: 128
                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
            value:
                description: value is the value of the tag. Some AWS service do not support empty values. Since tags are added to resources in many services, the length of the tag value must meet the requirements of all services.
                type: string
                maxLength: 256
                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
```

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 3: I think this section needs to be expanded with multiple examples, eg we don't have a user story for overriding the tags more locally which we have discussed through comments quite a bit

Author: Added new user stories to this list.

- User-defined tags can be updated post creation.

### Non-Goals

- To reduce initial scope, the proposal does not apply for clouds other than AWS. There will be no actions taken to prohibit that later.

### Limitations

- User-defined tags for PV volumes cannot be updated but only set during creation  of volume using `--extra-tags`.Present CSI spec does not support `UpdateVolume` to update volume metadata.
   Restarting csi driver to initiate multiple `CreateVolume` will depend on underlying storage layer idempotency implementation for the operation. It is recommended to use a interface from CSI spec which enforces idempotency guarantees for volume metadata updates.
   In case of AWS EC2  `CreateVolume`, returns `IdempotentParameterMismatch` error when identical request is not found for the same client token.
   Also, the CSI spec `https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md` mentions grpc error code
   `6 ALREADY_EXISTS` for `a volume corresponding to the specified volume name already exists but is incompatible with the specified capacity_range, volume_capabilities, parameters, accessibility_requirements or volume_content_source`.

> - User-defined tags cannot be updated for vpc, security groups, elb, route53, subnet resources as there is no operator managing the resources post installation.

Reviewer 3: Out of interest, is there anything other than the cloud controller manager you have in mind here? Not sure if the ccm supports tagging at the moment

> - User-defined tags cannot be updated for vpc, security groups, elb, route53, subnet resources as there is no operator managing the resources post installation.

Author: Updating to add more clarity.

>    User-defined tags cannot be updated to an AWS resource which is not managed by an operator in openshift-* namespace.

Author: No, it is to list the present state of operators that support this proposal are in openshift-* namespace.

- User-defined tags can be updated on the following AWS resources.

>   1. EC2 instances for master and worker nodes.

Reviewer 3: As there are machines for these in IPI clusters, MAO will keep the tags up to date, it's the one thing we do keep up to date, everything else is immutable.

>   1. EC2 instances for master and worker nodes.

Author: machine-api-provider-aws

resources created by in-cluster operators.\
  `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field will be set for deprecation.

  If `propagateUserTags` is set to true, install validation will fail if there is any tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io`.

- Add a new field `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. Tags included in the
  `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is true.

  `.spec.platformSpec.aws` is a mutable field and `.status.platformStatus.aws` is immutable.
  `.status.platformStatus.aws` will have older version tags defined and is required for upgrade case.

- All operators that create AWS resources (ingress, cloud credential, storage, image registry, machine-api) will apply these tags to all AWS resources they create.\
  Operator must update the AWS resource within (5 minutes + cloud provide API response time).\
  Operator must update AWS resource to match requested user-defined tags provided in `.spec.platformSpec.aws` (or `.status.platformStatus.aws`).\

>   Operator must consider `.status.platformStatus.aws` when AWS resource is created. `.status.platformStatus.aws` can be ignored for user-defined tag update/delete.

Author: `Operator must update the AWS resource within (5 minutes + cloud provide API response time)`
This is to keep all operators to update within a maximum time interval.

### Create tags scenarios
`resourceTags` that are specified in  `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the Infrastructure resource will merge with user-defined tags in an individual component.

In the case where a user-defined tag is specified in the Infrastructure resource and
1) There is already user tag with the same key present for AWS resource, the value from the AWS resource will be replaced.\
   For example,\
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_comp1`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value_infra1`\
   Action = Existing tag for AWS resource is updated to reflect new value.\
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_infra1`\
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource.

> 2) There is no tag with same key present, new user-defined tag is created for the AWS resource. In case of limit reached, a validation error is generated.\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2) There is no tag with same key present, new tag is created for the AWS resource. In case of limit reached, a validation error is generated.\
```

   For example,\
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_comp1`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value_infra1`\
   Action = A new tag is created for AWS resource.\
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_infra1`\
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to create tags for the AWS resource.

### Update tags scenarios

> Users can update the user-defined tags by editing `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended.

Reviewer 4: How are we enforcing that new additions are always appended?

Author: At implementation-level, this will be about GET tags from cloud provider, append and SET to cloud provider.

Reviewer 4: Are tags ordered in AWS? I did not think so.

Author: No, the tags are not ordered. The intent here is to read the existing tags from AWS resource and append any new tags found in Infrastructure CR.

On update of `resourceTags`, AWS resource is not created or restarted.

In the case where a user-defined tag is specified in the Infrastructure resource and

> 1) There is already user-defined tag with the same key and value present for AWS resource, the user-define tag value for the AWS resource will not be updated.\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1) There is already a tag with the same key and value present for AWS resource, the tag for the AWS resource will not be updated.\
```

> 1) There is already user-defined tag with the same key and value present for AWS resource, the user-define tag value for the AWS resource will not be updated.\

Reviewer 4: This is very surprising behavior. Kubernetes generally does not have different behavior when a field is added as opposed to updated. The spec determines the desired outcome that the user wants. It should not matter whether the desired value of the tag was original set to B or whether it was changed from A to B. In either case, the user wants the tag to have a value of B, and that is what the operator should strive to achieve.

Author: The behavior describes whether the operator will make a SET call to update tags with cloud provider.

Reviewer 4: Ugh, I think I missed the part where the value is equal, too.

   For example,\
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value_update1`\
   Action = There is no update for AWS resource.\
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`\
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource.

> 2) There is already user-defined tag with the same key and different value present for AWS resource, the user-define tag value for the AWS resource will be updated.\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2) There is already a tag with the same key and different value present for AWS resource, the user-define tag value for the AWS resource will be updated.\
```

   For example,\
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_old`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value_update1`\
   Action = Existing tag for AWS resource is updated to reflect new value.\
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`\
   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource.

> 3) The new user-defined tag request has empty string `""`, the user-defined tag value for the AWS resource will be updated. Please refer to the `Delete Scenarios` for more details on empty value string handling.\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3) The new user-defined tag request has empty string `""`, the tag value for the AWS resource will be updated. Please refer to the `Delete Scenarios` for more details on empty value string handling.\
```

   For example,\
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_old`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 =`\
   Action = Existing tag for AWS resource is updated to reflect new value.\

>    Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`\

Reviewer 4: This is not the action shown below in the "Delete tags scenarios". Which is correct?

Author: Ah!.. Thanks for finding it, this was related to 2-pass deletion which is not adopted by the design now. Deleting this case.

   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource. A warning also must be generated about user-defined tag being marked for deletion.

> ### Delete tags scenarios

Reviewer 4: There is no scenario detailing the behavior when a user-defined tag is actually deleted from the `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`. The possibility is mentioned later in the "Precedence scenarios" section.

Author: This is mentioned in caveats section.

> User-defined tags are deleted when the user sets the user-defined tag value to empty string in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tags are deleted when the user sets the user-defined tag value to an empty string in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.
```

> Also refer to `Precedence` scenario where delete of user-defined tag is not allowed to delete.\

Reviewer 4: This sentence does not make sense. What does "delete [...] is not allowed to delete" mean?

Author: Rephrasing it, thanks.

For example,\
Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_old`\
New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 =`\
Action = Existing tag for AWS resource is deleted.\
Final tag set to AWS resource = deleted\
Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to delete tags for the AWS resource.

### Precedence scenarios

> 1) User-defined tags on local objects MUST continue to take precedence during create and update. User-defined tags found on local objects must not be deleted by methods described in `Delete tags scenarios`.

Reviewer 4: What are local objects?

Reviewer 3: Eg a Machine, where you can set tags which override the infrastructure set tags

Reviewer 4: Is the term "local objects" defined somewhere in this proposal? Or is it a well-known term?

   A warning is generated to inform the user about action not being applied on the list of user tags.

   For example,\

>    Existing tag in local object like machine CRD = `key_infra1 = custom_value`\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Existing tag in local object like machine CR = `key_infra1 = custom_value`\
```

   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value1`\
   Action = The tag for AWS resource is maintained to `key_infra1 = custom_value`.\

>    Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_update1`\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = custom_value`\
```

>    Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource. A warning also must be generated about list of user-defined tags on which action is not applicable.

Reviewer 4: Why is there an event action since there was no update of tags on the AWS resource?

Author: The event notifies user that action failed to update tags due to precedence.

Reviewer 4: How will the operator know that the tag is new in order to generate this event?

Reviewer 4: In other words, I would assume that the controller will be watching the Infrastructure resource for changes and reconciling the controller's owned resources when a change is made to the user-defined tags. When the reconciliation loop later reconciles a resource owned by the controller, the controller only knows the current set of user-defined tags. The controller does not know what the previous set where that were applied for the particular resource being reconciled.

Author: For existing machine objects, user has a provision to add/update tags. The tags in machine object take precedence over Infrastructure CR. This is the existing behavior that needs to be supported to avoid breaking change.

2) `.spec.platformSpec.aws` take precedence over `.status.platformStatus.aws`. User-defined tags must be merged from `.status.platformStatus.aws` and set to AWS resource.

>    On delete, user-defined must also be removed from `.status.platformStatus.aws`, if present.

Reviewer 4: On delete of what? Be clear and specific.

Author: Rephrased it, thanks for locating it.

### Caveats

> 1) User updates the user-defined tag from using external tools when there is an entry in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1) User updates a resource's tag using an external tool when there is an entry in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`
```

>    The user-defined tag which is updated from spec, will be reconciled by operators to set value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   The resource's tag will be reconciled by its owning operator to the value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.
```

>    The user-defined tag will be overwritten with value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` when there is an update to `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.

Reviewer 4: Is the operator (1) not expected to restore the value of the tag until there is a separate change to `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` or (2) not allowed to restore the value of the tag until such a change is made?

Reviewer 3: I commented on this before, but it seems to have disappeared. The wording of an update to the tags doesn't make sense here, if we are reconciling resources, eg Machines, we will update the tags whenever the Machine is reconciled, can we reword this to make it clearer

Author: Rephased it.

>    User must handle inconsistencies in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` and user-defined tag value for AWS resource when using multiple tools to manage tags.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   The user must handle inconsistencies in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` and tags applied to AWS resources when using multiple tools to manage tags.
```

>    User must handle inconsistencies in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` and user-defined tag value for AWS resource when using multiple tools to manage tags.

Reviewer 4: Can you add some more color to this statement. It is not clear to me how the user would handle the inconsistencies or even what the inconsistencies would be?

Author: ok

   For example,\
   Edited existing tag using external tool for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_comp1`\
   Previous tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has `key_infra1 = value_infra1`\
   Action = Update existing tag with value from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`.\

>    Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value_infra1`\

Reviewer 4: What is the expected behavior if the value of the tag in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` had changed from A to B after the resource was created? As outline above, the operator is supposed to ensure that the resource has a tag with the value A.

Author: Yes, when the tag is updated directly on AWS resource using external tool, the owning operator will reconcile it back to values in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`

   Event action = An event is generated to notify user about the action status (success/failure) to update tags for the AWS resource.

> 2) User deletes the user-defined tag from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`

Reviewer 4: Why is this in the caveat section instead of the section about deleting tags?

Author: The user is not notified about the action.

>    The user-defined tag which is removed from spec, will not be reconciled or managed by operators.\

Reviewer 4: This sentence needs to be re-worked. It does not make sense as written. Are you trying to say that an operator is not expected (or even not permitted) to make changes to an AWS resource owned by the operator in response to a user-defined tag being removed from the infrastructure spec?

   User can update user-defined tag key:value using external tool. The user-defined tag will not be overwritten.

   For example,\
   Existing tag for AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value1`\
   New tag request = `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has no user-defined tag with key `key_infra1`\

>    Action = No change in existing user-defined tag.\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Action = No change in tags for the AWS resource.\
```

   Final tag set to AWS resource = `key_infra1 = value1`\
   Event action = No event

3) User sets user-defined tag to delete which is created using external tools.\

>    There is no validation check involved for creator of user-defined tag. Any user-defined tag added by user in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` is considered for create/update/delete accordingly.

Reviewer 4: I don't understand anything in this part.

> 4) Any user-defined tag set using `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` in `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io/v1` type has scope limited to cluster-level.

Reviewer 4: What does it mean to "[have] scope limited to cluster-level"?

Author: That means, the tag updated in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` will affect  all AWS resources in the cluster that are being managed by operators.

> 5) User-defined tags are not synced from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` to `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` for following reasons.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5) User-defined tags are not synced from `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` to `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` for the following reasons.
```

- User-defined tags in `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` can be "removed without delete", "delete", "update".
  `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` to `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` sync is not required,
  as there will be no versioning of the user-defined tags required to override the user-defined tags in Infrastructure CRD.
  Instead, the user-defined tags (if supported in resource operator spec field, e.g: machine) can override the user-defined tags in Infrastructure CRD.
- As `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has the actual values. Sync to `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` was required in earlier design to identify if the

>   user-defined tag was created using Infrastructure CRD or external tool. Identifying the creator tool was done to restrict user from editing the same user-tag kv pair using multiple tools.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  tag on the resource was created using Infrastructure CRD or external tool. Identifying the creator tool was done to restrict user from editing the same user-tag kv pair using multiple tools.
```

>   as there will be no versioning of the user-defined tags required to override the user-defined tags in Infrastructure CRD.
>   Instead, the user-defined tags (if supported in resource operator spec field, e.g: machine) can override the user-defined tags in Infrastructure CRD.
> - As `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has the actual values. Sync to `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` was required in earlier design to identify if the
>   user-defined tag was created using Infrastructure CRD or external tool. Identifying the creator tool was done to restrict user from editing the same user-tag kv pair using multiple tools.
>   This inherently poses many scenarios of conflict which will result in user-defined tag kv pair being inconsistent across cluster when applied using Infrastructure CRD. Hence, user will be confused which tool to be used to update tag.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  as there will be no versioning of the user-defined tags required to override the user-defined tags in Infrastructure CR.
  Instead, the user-defined tags (if supported in resource operator spec field, e.g: machine) can override the user-defined tags in Infrastructure CR.
- As `.spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags` has the actual values. Sync to `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` was required in earlier design to identify if the
  user-defined tag was created using Infrastructure CR or external tool. Identifying the creator tool was done to restrict user from editing the same user-tag kv pair using multiple tools.
  This inherently poses many scenarios of conflict which will result in user-defined tag kv pair being inconsistent across cluster when applied using Infrastructure CR. Hence, user will be confused which tool to be used to update tag.
```

>   This inherently poses many scenarios of conflict which will result in user-defined tag kv pair being inconsistent across cluster when applied using Infrastructure CRD. Hence, user will be confused which tool to be used to update tag.

Reviewer 4: I don't follow this argument. This exact same logic can be applied to argue against allowing for user-defined tags in the Infrastructure CRD at all. Whether the authoritative source for the user-defined tags is in the spec or the status does nothing to alleviate conflicts with external tools that may be mutating resource tags outside of the cluster.

Author: The inconsistency here is created between different resource operators.

The Infrastructure resource example to use spec for api changes

```go
// AWSPlatformSpec holds the desired state of the Amazon Web Services Infrastructure provider.
// This only includes fields that can be modified in the cluster.
type AWSPlatformSpec struct {
    // Existing fields
    ...
    // ResourceTags is a list of additional tags to apply to AWS resources created for the cluster.
    // See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws_tagging.html for information on tagging AWS resources.
    // AWS supports a maximum of 10 tags per resource. OpenShift reserves 5 tags for its use, leaving 5 tags
    // available for the user.

>     // While ResourceTags field is mutable, items can not be removed.

Reviewer 4: There is text above in this proposal describing the behavior when an item is removed.

Author: Thanks for identifying it. Updated the comments.

    description: ResourceTags is a list of additional tags to apply to AWS resources created for the cluster. See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws_tagging.html for information on tagging AWS resources.
    type: array
    maxItems: 10
    items:
        description: AWSResourceTag is a tag to apply to AWS resources created for the cluster.
        type: object
        required:
            - key
            - value
        properties:
            key:
                description: key is the key of the tag
                type: string
                maxLength: 128
                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
            value:
                description: value is the value of the tag. Some AWS service do not support empty values. Since tags are added to resources in many services, the length of the tag value must meet the requirements of all services.
                type: string
                maxLength: 256
                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
```

### User Stories

- As a security-conscious ROSA customer, I want to restrict the permissions granted to Red Hat in my AWS account by using

> AWS resource tags.Refer to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDE-1146.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
AWS resource tags. Refer to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDE-1146.
```

Author: Removed the jira link and udpated story.

> AWS resource tags.Refer to https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDE-1146.

Reviewer 4: Don't link me to a Jira card. Describe the story here.

Author: ok

> - As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to add user-defined tags for AWS resources provisioned by an OCP cluster.

Reviewer 4: To what end? Be specific about the story.

Author: Updated sentence to mention the maximum tags.

- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to delete user-defined tags managed by OpenShift for AWS resources.

- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to update user-defined tags managed by OpenShift for AWS resources.

> - As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to remove user-defined tags without delete for AWS resources.

Reviewer 4: How is this different than the story above about wanting to be able to delete user-defined tags?

Author: Rephrased it.

  This enables, user-defined tags to be modified on AWS without being overridden by OpenShift operators.

> - As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I should be able to get events when update/delete action is successful or failed.

Reviewer 4: This is not a story. This is a monitoring requirement of other stories. Think of it this way: If the other stories were all removed, would this story have any meaning?

> - As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I expect user-defined tags added in local objects must not be overridden by user-defined tags in install config.

Reviewer 4: This is a meaningless statement. For the life of the install config, there are no local objects.

Author: Ah, It was not about the life of install config, but the tags information added in it. I have rephrased to avoid the contextual ambiguity.

### Test Plan

Update the `resourceTags` testcases to check successful update from Infrastructure resource.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

NA

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- Upgrade/downgrade testing
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Stress testing for scaling and tag update scenarios

#### Removing a deprecated feature

`experimentalPropagateUserTags` field will be set for deprecation.
`.status.platformStatus.aws` will be set for deprecation.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

On upgrade:

On upgrade from version supporting `experimentalPropagateUserTags`, openshift components that consume the new field should merge `.status.platformStatus.aws` and `.spec.platformSpec.aws`.
`.spec.platformSpec.aws` can be updated or changed which will override the values from status.

For installer configuration compatibility, configuration with `experimentalPropagateUserTags` should be supported.

On downgrade:

The status field may remain populated, components may or may not continue to tag newly created resources with the additional tags depending on whether or not a given component still has logic to respect the status tags, after the downgrade.

> `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field should be generated in installer configuration to support lower version installers.

Reviewer 4: What does this mean?

Author: This means, the install-config generated with the proposed version can still be used with experimental version which adds tags to status field

Reviewer 4: We generally do not support taking an install config from version n+1 and using it with a installer creating a cluster of version n.

Author: Ok, updated EP to remove the lower version compatibility.

- the administrator or service (in the case of Managed OpenShift) installing OpenShift can pass an arbitrary
   list of user-defined tags to the OpenShift Installer, and everything created by the installer and all other
   bootstrapped components will apply those tags to all resources created in AWS, for the life of the cluster, and where supported by AWS.
- tags can be applied at creation time, in an atomic operation.

> - tags can be updated post creation.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that tags of certain resources like PVC volumes cannot be updated.

Reviewer: done below by @TrilokGeer - thanks

- the administrator or service (in the case of Managed OpenShift) installing OpenShift can pass an arbitrary
   list of user-defined tags to the OpenShift Installer, and everything created by the installer and all other
   bootstrapped components will apply those tags to all resources created in AWS, for the life of the cluster, and where supported by AWS.
- tags can be applied at creation time, in an atomic operation.
- tags can be updated post creation.

### Non-Goals

- to reduce initial scope, we are not implementing this for clouds other than AWS. We will not take any actions
   to prohibit that later.

### Limitations

> - tags for PV volumes cannot be updated but only set during creation.

Reviewer: maybe worth calling out why. I personally would love to see this solved upstream, eg through:
 
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-ebs-csi-driver/issues/1014 
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-ebs-csi-driver/issues/180#issuecomment-947568029

## Proposal

New `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field added to `.platform.aws` of install config to indicate that the user tags should be applied to AWS
resources created by in-cluster operators.

If `experimentalPropagateUserTags` is true, install validation will fail if there is any tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io`.

Add a new field `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. Tags included in the

> `resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field is true.

Reviewer: > installer only if the `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field is true.

since we want to make this GA: I guess this flag should be true by default?

Author: this flag can be made a mandatory field.

> Note existing unchanged behavior: The installer will apply these tags to all AWS resources it creates with terraform (e.g. bootstrap and master EC2 instances) from the install config, not from infrastructure status, and regardless if the propagation option is set.

Reviewer: infrastructure status != spec 

also needs a quick update depending on what we want to do with the feature flag

All operators that create AWS resources (ingress, cloud credential, storage, image registry, machine-api)
will apply these tags to all AWS resources they create.

userTags that are specified in the Infrastructure resource will merge with userTags specified in an individual component. In the case where a userTag is specified in the Infrastructure resource and there is a tag with the same key specified in an individual component, the value from the individual component will have precedence and be used.

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer: it's worth calling out here that upserting tags is a metadata operation and will not suddenly restart or recreate the given resource

                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
```

### User Stories

https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDE-1146 - IAM users and roles can only operate on resources with specific tags
As a security-conscious ROSA customer, I want to restrict the permissions granted to Red Hat in my AWS account by using
AWS resource tags.

### API Extensions

This proposal edits `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io/v1` type

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

NA

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Failure Modes

NA

#### Support Procedures

NA

## Design Details

User can add tags during installation for creation of resources with tags. Installer creates infrastructure manifests with `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io`.
Cluster config operator reconciles Infrastructure object, validates and updates `resourcesTags` from `.spec.platformSpec.aws` to  `.status.platformStatus.aws`.
Operators that operate on aws resources must merge the tags from `.spec.platformSpec.aws`, `.status.platformStatus.aws` and individual component tags.

The values from `status.platformStatus.aws` will used to only support downgrade.

> In case of precedence conflict or errors, the same will be reported using `Events` by the operators.

Reviewer: how could those arise? If there's a precedence then the last-write always wins, so to say

Author: The precedence is to maintain creator/updator tool (in-case of external tool usage) remains same for user-defined tags which are created correspondingly. For example, the user tag is created during installation, can be updated by infrastructure CRD update. Any update using other CLI tools to update, will be overwritten on next reconcile cycle by the resource operator.

`.status.platformStatus.aws` can be deprecated in the future versions when there is a CRD validation possible to avoid removal of userTags from `.spec.platformSpec.aws`.

### Test Plan

Update the `resourceTags` testcases to check successful update from Infrastructure resource.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

NA

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- Upgrade/downgrade testing
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default

> - Stress testing for scaling and tag update scenarios

Reviewer: I commented this earlier, but we need to most likely turn on the feature flag by default

#### Removing a deprecated feature

> 

Reviewer: can't comment down below, but the 
> ### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

section would probably need some adjustment. The downgrade you already explained above, but the upgrade now is slightly different

- tags can be updated post creation.

### Non-Goals

- to reduce initial scope, we are not implementing this for clouds other than AWS. We will not take any actions
   to prohibit that later.

### Limitations

- tags for PV volumes cannot be updated but only set during creation  of volume using `--extra-tags`.Present CSI spec does not support `UpdateVolume` to update volume metadata.
   Restarting csi driver to initiate multiple `CreateVolume` will depend on underlying storage layer idempotency implementation for the operation. It is recommended to use a interface from CSI spec which enforces idempotency gurantees for volume metadata updates.
   In case of AWS EC2  `CreateVolume`, returns `IdempotentParameterMismatch` error when identical request is not found for the same client token.
   Also, the CSI spec `https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md` mentions grpc error code
   `6 ALREADY_EXISTS` for `a volume corresponding to the specified volume name already exists but is incompatible with the specified capacity_range, volume_capabilities, parameters, accessibility_requirements or volume_content_source`.

## Proposal

> New `propagateUserTags` field added to `.platform.aws` of install config to indicate that the user tags should be applied to AWS

Reviewer 4: Why do we want a field added for this feature? This should not be optional. If the user adds user tags, they get applied to all resources.

Author: The field here is only to update the existing `experimentalPropagateUserTags`. This should be mentioned as `renamed to` rather than `added to`

Reviewer 5: makes more sense to just deprecate the field and eventually remove it

resources created by in-cluster operators.

> `propagateUserTags` field is by default set to true.

Reviewer 4: You cannot have a default value of true.

Reviewer 3: Better to negate the statement and have something like `disableUserTagPropagation` which defaults to false

Reviewer 6: And this "don't apply user tags" information will make it down into the cluster how?

Author: right, this is updated in the new version of EP.

`experimentalPropagateUserTags` field will be set for deprecation.

> If `propagateUserTags` is not set to false, install validation will fail if there is any tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io`.

Reviewer 4: I do not understand the constraint around this validation. The user cannot use a tag that starts with `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io` **regardless** of whether the tags are propagated to resources created in the cluster.

Author: The constraint is as per the present implementation, following PR refers to the changes
https://github.com/staebler/installer/blob/2033421c8dcba057a643cdd35e040d7ddcd4c355/pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go#L55

Is there another set of validation that disallows `kubernetes.io` or `openshift.io` by default?

Add a new field `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. Tags included in the
`resourceTags` field will be applied to new resources created for the cluster. The `resourceTags` field will be populated by the installer only if the `propagateUserTags` field is not set to false.

`.spec.platformSpec.aws` is a mutable field and `.status.platformStatus.aws` is immutable.

Note existing unchanged behavior: The installer will apply these tags to all AWS resources it creates with terraform (e.g. bootstrap and master EC2 instances) from the install config, not from infrastructure status, and regardless if the propagation option is set.

All operators that create AWS resources (ingress, cloud credential, storage, image registry, machine-api)
will apply these tags to all AWS resources they create.

> userTags that are specified in the Infrastructure resource will merge with userTags specified in an individual component. In the case where a userTag is specified in the Infrastructure resource and there is a tag with the same key specified in an individual component, the value from the individual component will have precedence and be used.

Reviewer 4: An example will help here.

Author: Updated the outline for EP to include more examples and scenarios.

Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.
On update of `resourceTags`, AWS resource is not created or restarted.

> `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` reflects the present set of userTags. In case when the userTags are created by installer or newly added in Infrastructure resource is updated on the individual component directly using external tools, the value from Infrastructure resource will have the precedence.

Reviewer 4: The second sentence can use some grammatical clean up to make it easier to read. Also, an example would be helpful.

Author: Updated the EP, thanks.

> `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` reflects the present set of userTags. In case when the userTags are created by installer or newly added in Infrastructure resource is updated on the individual component directly using external tools, the value from Infrastructure resource will have the precedence.

Reviewer 4: The first sentence conflicts with the previous claim that `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` is immutable.

Author: Correct, updated the EP to correctly reflect the fields that are mutable and immutable.

> `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` reflects the present set of userTags. In case when the userTags are created by installer or newly added in Infrastructure resource is updated on the individual component directly using external tools, the value from Infrastructure resource will have the precedence.

Reviewer 7: @TrilokGeer This statement from the first point `the value from the individual component will have precedence and be used` contradicts the third point where precedence is given to `Infrastructure`.

Author: The initial thought of giving precedence to the tool used to create tags seems to add more complexity and confusion. In the updated EP, this is changed to use tags from `Infrastructure`

> The precedence helps to maintain creator/updator tool (in-case of external tool usage) remains same for user-defined tags which are created correspondingly.

Reviewer 4: This sentence could use some grammatical clean up to make it easier to read.

Author: Updated the EP with new content and examples.

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer 4: What is the userTags field? Do you mean the resourceTags field? And which one: the one in the spec or the status?

Author: Updated the EP with new content and examples.

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer 4: Why are we not allowing the user to delete tags from `resourceTags`? I understand why an operator would not delete the tag from a resource that it owns in response to a user deleting a tag from `resourceTags`. But the user should be able to delete a tag so that new resources do not get the tag. Moreover, I think that it needs to be called out here that if a tag that has been removed from `resourceTags` is removed by an external tool from a resource, that the operator owning that resource will not re-add the tag.

Author: The delete tags is now supported but in a two-pass method to avoid accidental deletions. In the older version, the delete was not supported because of the overhead of "previous version of tags" maintained at `status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags`. 
In the updated version, there is no version maintained. Instead, the focus is whether "user tag is managed by Openshift" or external tool. If user tag is added to `Infrastructure` CRD in `spec.platformSpec.aws.resourceTags`, it overrides any external tool operations.

> If the userTags field is changed post-install, there is no guarantee about how an in-cluster operator will respond to the change. Some operators may reconcile the change and change tags on the AWS resource. Some operators may ignore the change. However, if tags are removed from userTags, the tag will not be removed from the AWS resource.

Reviewer 4: The last sentence contradicts the first sentence from the previous paragraph. The previous paragraph states that tags cannot be deleted from userTags. This paragraph describes the behavior when a tag is deleted.

Author: Removed the confusion around precedence.

> If the userTags field is changed post-install, there is no guarantee about how an in-cluster operator will respond to the change. Some operators may reconcile the change and change tags on the AWS resource. Some operators may ignore the change. However, if tags are removed from userTags, the tag will not be removed from the AWS resource.

Reviewer 4: This is very hand-wavy. We need to guarantee how an in-cluster operator will respond to the change. The guarantee needs to be that the operator will adjust the tags on the resource. Any resources for which we cannot satisfy that guarantee need to be called out explicitly.

The Infrastructure resource example to involve spec for api changes

```go
// AWSPlatformSpec holds the desired state of the Amazon Web Services Infrastructure provider.
// This only includes fields that can be modified in the cluster.
type AWSPlatformSpec struct {
    // Existing fields
    ...
    // ResourceTags is a list of additional tags to apply to AWS resources created for the cluster.
    // See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws_tagging.html for information on tagging AWS resources.

>     // AWS supports a maximum of 50 tags per resource. OpenShift reserves 25 tags for its use, leaving 25 tags

Reviewer 4: We are bound by the resource that allows the fewest tags. An S3 bucket can only have at most 10 tags.
```suggestion
    // AWS supports a maximum of 10 tags per resource. OpenShift reserves 5 tags for its use, leaving 5 tags
```

                type: string
                maxLength: 256
                minLength: 1
                pattern: ^[0-9A-Za-z_.:/=+-@]+$
```

### User Stories

https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDE-1146 - IAM users and roles can only operate on resources with specific tags
As a security-conscious ROSA customer, I want to restrict the permissions granted to Red Hat in my AWS account by using
AWS resource tags.

### API Extensions

This proposal edits `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io/v1` type

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

NA

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Failure Modes

NA

#### Support Procedures

NA

## Design Details

User can add tags during installation for creation of resources with tags. Installer creates infrastructure manifests with `resourceTags` to `.spec.platformSpec.aws` of the `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io`.
Cluster config operator reconciles Infrastructure object, validates and updates `resourcesTags` from `.spec.platformSpec.aws` to  `.status.platformStatus.aws`.

> Operators that operate on aws resources must merge the tags from `.spec.platformSpec.aws`, `.status.platformStatus.aws` and individual component tags.

Reviewer 4: Operators should not be considering `.spec.platformSpec.aws`. Operators should only be considered tags that the cluster-config-operator has already vetted, namely those in `.status.platformStatus.aws`.

Author: Updated the EP with new content and examples.

> The values from `status.platformStatus.aws` will used to only support downgrade.

Reviewer 4: I do not understand this statement. This seems to contradict directly the previous statement that operators should be merging tags from `.status.platformStatus.aws`.

Author: Updated the EP with new content and examples.

> In case of precedence conflict or errors, the same will be reported using `Events` by the operators.

Reviewer 4: Please give an example here. Are you saying that if a component has the tag `my-tag:component-value` and the resourceTags include the tag `my-tag:infrastructure-value` then the operator should report an event for this? If so, at what regularity?

Author: Updated the EP with new content and examples.

> `.status.platformStatus.aws` can be deprecated in the future versions when there is a CRD validation possible to avoid removal of userTags from `.spec.platformSpec.aws`.

Reviewer 4: Why is it not already possible?

Author: The `.status.platformStatus.aws` will be deprecated in this version.

### Test Plan

Update the `resourceTags` testcases to check successful update from Infrastructure resource.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

NA

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- Upgrade/downgrade testing
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Stress testing for scaling and tag update scenarios

#### Removing a deprecated feature

`experimentalPropagateUserTags` field will be set for deprecation.
`.status.platformStatus.aws` will be set for deprecation.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

On upgrade:

On upgrade from version supporting `experimentalPropagateUserTags`, openshift components that consume the new field should merge `.status.platformStatus.aws` and `.spec.platformSpec.aws`.
`.spec.platformSpec.aws` can be updated or changed which will override the values from status and a new `.status.platformStatus.aws` will be set.

> For installer configuration compatibility, configuration with `experimentalPropagateUserTags` should be supported.

Reviewer 4: How is this going to work? If the default behavior is to propagate user tags and the default of `experimentalPropagateUserTags` is false, that is an unsupported configuration.

Author: This behaviour is updated. The idea was to have versioning of tags to identify the creator tool.

On downgrade:

The status field may remain populated, components may or may not continue to tag newly created resources w/ the additional tags depending on whether or not a given component still has logic to respect the status tags, after the downgrade.

> `experimentalPropagateUserTags` field should be generated in installer configuration to support downgrade.

Reviewer 4: This sentence does not make any sense to me. What does the install config have to do with downgrades?

Author: The scenario to be supported here is to make install-config from the proposal version to be compatible with previous version installers.

userTags that are specified in the infrastructure resource will merge with userTags specified in an individual component. In the case where a userTag is specified in the infrastructure resource and there is a tag with the same key specified in an individual component, the value from the individual component will have precedence and be used.

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer 8: > Are we sure that all resources will be updated with the new tag values?

As I understand it, the point of this PR is to make it so.  

> Are there any that are create and forget?

This needs to be clarified in this PR.  The enhancement summary only lists one component (the ingress operator) that required changes for the original user-defined AWS tags API implementation.  However, there are probably other components that also required changes.  We'll need to make sure that every team that has a component that required changes be aware of this update to the API.  We really don't want to get into a state where updating tags is kind of sort of supported because some components handle updates while others do not.

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer: > Are we sure that all resources will be updated with the new tag values? Are there any that are create and forget?

@JoelSpeed EBS would be a candidate as we lose track of the volumes and won't attempt to re-tag existing ones. This should also be discussed here, I think we added this into our user story back then when we refined it.

@Miciah you can find some overview of all components that have tags and need them updated as stories in the epic: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CFE-69

I agree that this should be included in here as a listing and we should get the respective teams to review too.

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer 3: How do we find out which components create other AWS resources, for example, I'm working on adding support for a new AWS resource, Placement Groups, and at the moment, we aren't tagging it with user defined tags. We will need to do so for GA but it's not in the MVP. 

This is another resource where we are creating but not updating the object and so I'm not sure how the tagging would work here, I guess it will be like the EBS situation?

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer: > How do we find out which components create other AWS resources, for example, I'm working on adding support for a new AWS resource, Placement Groups, and at the moment, we aren't tagging it with user defined tags. We will need to do so for GA but it's not in the MVP.

I've been looking into this a couple months back, one can tap into CloudTrail and see what resources were PUT by the IAM user that created the cluster and then request the resource tags by the respective resource ID (then check for missing tags etc). We have to setup a proper environment for this I believe, so we didn't pursue this any further because of the effort.

Do you know how many new AWS (taggable) resources we introduce into core OpenShift per release? I was under the impression that this will continuously reduce towards zero as we focus on addon and component optionality. `Placement Groups` is certainly a great counter-example :) 

> This is another resource where we are creating but not updating the object and so I'm not sure how the tagging would work here, I guess it will be like the EBS situation?

I guess so, and there will for sure be other cases that could also be outside of our control in the future. We need to ensure to document them properly.

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer 3: > I've been looking into this a couple months back, one can tap into CloudTrail and see what resources were PUT by the IAM user that created the cluster and then request the resource tags by the respective resource ID (then check for missing tags etc). We have to setup a proper environment for this I believe, so we didn't pursue this any further because of the effort.

This sounds like something we could possibly codify into an E2E test, have you considered that?

> Do you know how many new AWS (taggable) resources we introduce into core OpenShift per release? I was under the impression that this will continuously reduce towards zero as we focus on addon and component optionality. Placement Groups is certainly a great counter-example :)

Our team frequently adds support for new EC2 features to the Machine API. Sometimes these rely on creating additional resources, as with the Placement Group example. I doubt we will see that slow down as we still have many customer RFEs asking for support for various use cases on each of the clouds

> I guess so, and there will for sure be other cases that could also be outside of our control in the future. We need to ensure to document them properly.

Agreed, would be good to enumerate all of the components and the resources they create and have that documented. Sounds like your CloudTrail thing could be used to generate a list?

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Reviewer: > This sounds like something we could possibly codify into an E2E test, have you considered that?

I do remember that there was a problem with this approach and thus we dropped it, @TrilokGeer it's probably good to spin up a R&D task to figure out if we can test this case in the e2e too. @thejasn is working on testing right now I believe.

Agreed, if we can automate this to generate a list, that would be even cooler!

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Author: Thanks for the query. Yes, there are resources that are create and forget, for example, resources created by csi drivers.

> Users can update the `resourceTags` by editing `.spec.aws` of the `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` type. New addition of tags are always appended. Any update in the existing tags, which are added by installer or  by edit in `resourceTags`, will replace the previous tag value.

Author: @tjungblu @JoelSpeed yes, this can be checked out. Thanks.

`.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` reflects the present set of userTags. In case when the userTags are created by installer or newly added in infrastructure resource is updated on the individual component directly using external tools, the value from infrastructure resource will have the precedence.

The precedence helps to maintain creator/updator tool (in-case of external tool usage) remains same for user-defined tags which are created correspondingly.

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer 9: We can keep clarity of Desired (spec) and Observed (status) and still restrict unsupported values - with [dynamic admission control](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer 3: We can use a dynamic admission control for this, though at the moment, I don't think we have anything set up to observe the infrastructure object.

If that's the route you want to take here, I would consult the API team for their suggestion as you will need to create and manage a validating and/or mutating webhook which comes with some overhead

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Author: This is great point, thanks.

The idea is to have a "observed config" way to be aware of how Openshift deals with the tags. 

> `.status.platformStatus.aws.resourceTags` reflects the present set of userTags. In case when the userTags are created by installer or newly added in infrastructure resource is updated on the individual component directly using external tools, the value from infrastructure resource will have the precedence.

Also, the precedence of user tag updates can be maintained.

> The precedence helps to maintain creator/updator tool (in-case of external tool usage) remains same for user-defined tags which are created correspondingly.

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer: > feel like we probably will want to have some way to deny removal of tags from the infrastructure spec.

just my 2cents here. I think it's totally fine from a customer PoV to remove tags from the infra spec to set these tags as "unmanaged" by OpenShift. Imagine switching to a 3rd party component to manage tags like that one: https://github.com/mtougeron/k8s-aws-ebs-tagger

Would be bad if a customer would need to reinstall the entire cluster to get rid of the tag management.

What we continue to NOT do, is try to be smart about deleting existing tags on resources or detecting what we created vs. what was already there and such.

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer 3: > Would be bad if a customer would need to reinstall the entire cluster to get rid of the tag management.

This is a pretty good argument, I'd say this needs writing out in the enhancement to explain that if that's the route we want to take. The existing language saying not to delete the tags will need to be updated/clarified

> The userTags field is intended to be set at install time and updatable (not allowed to delete). Components that respect this field must only ever add tags that they retrieve from this field to cloud resources, they must never remove tags from the existing underlying cloud resource even if the tags are removed from this field.

Reviewer 4: > is how we will deal with the 25 tag limit from users
The reality is even worse. Since S3 buckets can have at most 10 tags, and OpenShift is already using 2 of those, the user can only add 8 more tags.

If the userTags field is changed post-install, there is no guarantee about how an in-cluster operator will respond to the change. Some operators may reconcile the change and change tags on the AWS resource. Some operators may ignore the change. However, if tags are removed from userTags, the tag will not be removed from the AWS resource.

The infrastructure resource example to involve spec for api changes

```go
// AWSPlatformSpec holds the desired state of the Amazon Web Services infrastructure provider.
// This only includes fields that can be modified in the cluster.
type AWSPlatformSpec struct {

>     // serviceEndpoints list contains custom endpoints which will override default

Reviewer 3: Are the service endpoints a new thing or do they exist already?

If they are prior existing I would suggest omitting them here and just adding something along the lines of the below in their place
```
  // Existing fields
  ...
```

Author: Service endpoints are existing fields, thanks for identifying this.

### Test Plan

> Update the userTag testcases to check successful update from infrastructure resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Update the `resourceTags` testcases to check successful update from infrastructure resource.
```

Reviewer 9: Capital "I" in all Infrastructure occurrences?

### Graduation Criteria

> #### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

Reviewer: it's already TP, so I think you can leave this as "NA" or something like that

Author: Ok, done.
